

<!-- README.md is generated from README.qmd. Please edit that file -->

# Trusting but forgetting impressive science

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Abstract

Trust in science is associated with significant outcomes such as intent
to vaccinate and belief in climate change. Around the globe, most people
trust science at least to some extent. However, the causes of this trust
aren’t well understood. Here we propose a ‘rational impression’ model of
trust in science. In this model, people trust scientists because they
are impressed by their findings, and this impression of trust persists
even after knowledge of the specific content has vanished. We present
evidence for this model in two experiments (total n = 696) with UK
participants. In Experiment 1, impressive scientific findings lead
participants to think of the scientists as more competent and their
scientific discipline as more trustworthy. In Experiment 2, we show that
participants have these impressions despite forgetting the content that
generated them. The rational impression model can explain why people
trust science without remembering much of it. It also stresses the
relevance of science communication.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

## How to download and replicate

To reproduce the findings and re-run the analysis, do the following:

1.  Download and install this repository. You can use GitHub to clone or
    fork the repository (see the green “Clone or download” button at the
    top of the GitHub page).
2.  Open `impressive_science.Rproj` to open an [RStudio
    Project](https://r4ds.had.co.nz/workflow-projects.html).
3.  Within the RStudio Project, open the `manuscript.Rmd` file and run
    it.

Please find the [session info below](#session-info).

*Estimated installation time* : If you have R and Rstudio installed,
then adding additional packages required in our R scripts is quick (a
couple of minutes)

*Estimated run time*: Rendering the `manuscript.Rmd` document takes less
than 1min on our machine (see [session info](#session-info))

## Files glossary

- the two main files are the reproducible source scripts of the paper:
  `manuscript.Rmd` is an anonymized version for peer review,
  `preprint.Rmd` is the version for the public preprint on OSF.
- all files with the prefix `manuscript_*` or `preprint_*` are output
  files that are generated by these source files.
- `appendix*` files contain the appendices that are automatically added
  to `manuscript.Rmd`/`preprint.Rmd` when rendering.
- `experiment_*` folders contain all files related to the respective
  experiment. The `/data` folders contain the raw data (`qualtrics.csv`)
  and cleaned data (`cleaned.csv`). The cleaning can be reproduced by
  running the `cleaning.Rmd` files in the folder of each respective
  experiment.
- `functions/` folder contains functions that we rely upon in our
  analysis scripts. To keep the `manuscript.Rmd`/`preprint.Rmd` document
  neat and readable, we wrote all lengthy code bits as external
  functions.
- running the `manuscript.Rmd`/`preprint.Rmd` file will generate an
  `output` folder which lists all figures generated by the `paper.Rmd`
  file as `.png` and `.pdf` files.
- `references.bib` contains the references
- `stimuli` folder contains all stimuli
- `gss_cross` contains the screening script we used for the cumulative
  GSS cross-section file ([which can be found
  here](https://gss.norc.org/us/en/gss/get-the-data/stata.html))

## Session info

    #> R version 4.4.1 (2024-06-14)
    #> Platform: aarch64-apple-darwin20
    #> Running under: macOS 15.3.1
    #> 
    #> Matrix products: default
    #> BLAS:   /Library/Frameworks/R.framework/Versions/4.4-arm64/Resources/lib/libRblas.0.dylib 
    #> LAPACK: /Library/Frameworks/R.framework/Versions/4.4-arm64/Resources/lib/libRlapack.dylib;  LAPACK version 3.12.0
    #> 
    #> locale:
    #> [1] en_US.UTF-8/en_US.UTF-8/en_US.UTF-8/C/en_US.UTF-8/en_US.UTF-8
    #> 
    #> time zone: Europe/Paris
    #> tzcode source: internal
    #> 
    #> attached base packages:
    #> [1] stats     graphics  grDevices utils     datasets  methods   base     
    #> 
    #> loaded via a namespace (and not attached):
    #>  [1] compiler_4.4.1    here_1.0.1        fastmap_1.2.0     rprojroot_2.0.4  
    #>  [5] cli_3.6.3         tools_4.4.1       htmltools_0.5.8.1 rstudioapi_0.17.1
    #>  [9] yaml_2.3.10       rmarkdown_2.28    knitr_1.48        jsonlite_1.8.9   
    #> [13] xfun_0.49         digest_0.6.37     rlang_1.1.4       evaluate_1.0.1

## Licenses

**Text and figures:** All prose and images are licensed under Creative
Commons ([CC-BY-4.0](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/)).

**Code:** All code is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE.md).
